A disaster is a serious problem occurring over a short or long period of time that causes widespread human, material, economic or environmental loss which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources. Disasters are routinely divided into either "natural disasters" caused by natural hazards or "human-instigated disasters" caused from anthropogenic hazards. However, in modern times, the divide between natural, human-made and human-accelerated disasters is difficult to draw. Examples of natural hazards include avalanches, flooding, cold waves and heat waves, droughts, earthquakes, cyclones, landslides, lightning, tsunamis, volcanic activity, wildfires, and winter precipitation. Examples of anthropogenic hazards include criminality, civil disorder, terrorism, war, industrial hazards, engineering hazards, power outages, fire, hazards caused by transportation, and environmental hazards. Developing countries suffer the greatest costs when a disaster hits – more than 95% of all deaths caused by hazards occur in developing countries, and losses due to natural hazards are 20 times greater (as a percentage of gross domestic product) in developing countries than in industrialized countries. ==Etymology== The word disaster is derived from Middle French and that from Old Italian , which in turn comes from the Ancient Greek pejorative prefix - (-) "bad" and (), "star". The root of the word disaster ("bad star" in Greek) comes from an astrological sense of a calamity blamed on the position of planets."Disaster" in Etymology online ==Classification== Disasters are routinely divided into natural or human-made. However, in modern times, the divide between natural, man-made and man- accelerated disasters is quite difficult to draw. Complex disasters, where there is no single root cause, are more common in developing countries. A specific disaster may spawn a secondary disaster that increases the impact. A classic example is an earthquake that causes a tsunami, resulting in coastal flooding, resulting in damage to a nuclear power plant (such as the Fukushima nuclear disaster). Some manufactured disasters have been wrongly ascribed to nature, such as smog and acid rain. Some researchers also differentiate between recurring events, such as seasonal flooding, and those considered unpredictable. ===Natural disasters (caused by natural hazards)=== thumb|Haiti earthquake damage thumb|Driving through flash flood ===Human-instigated disasters (caused by anthropogenic hazards)=== Human-instigated disasters are the consequence of technological or human hazards. Examples include war, social unrest, stampedes, fires, transport accidents, industrial accidents, conflicts, oil spills, terrorist attacks, and nuclear explosions/nuclear radiation. Other types of induced disasters include the more cosmic scenarios of catastrophic climate change, nuclear war, and bioterrorism. One opinion argues that all disasters can be seen as human-made, due to human failure to introduce appropriate emergency management measures.Blaikie, Piers, Terry Cannon, Ian Davis & Ben Wisner. At Risk – Natural hazards, people's vulnerability and disasters, Wiltshire: Routledge, 2003, Famines may be caused locally by drought, flood, fire, or pestilence, but in modern times there is plenty of food globally, and sustained localized shortages are generally due to government mismanagement, violent conflict, or an economic system that does not distribute food where needed. Earthquakes are mainly hazardous because of human-created buildings and dams; avoiding earthquake- generated tsunamis and landslides is largely a matter of location. ==Responses== The following table categorizes some disasters and notes first response initiatives.Business Continuity Planning (BCP): Sample Plan For Nonprofit Organizations. Pages 11-12. Retrieved 8 August 2012. Natural Disaster Example Profile First response Avalanche The sudden, drastic flow of snow down a slope, occurring when either natural triggers, such as loading from new snow or rain, or artificial triggers, such as explosives or backcountry skiers, overload the snowpack Shut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption Blizzard A severe snowstorm characterized by very strong winds and low temperatures Power off all equipment; listen to blizzard advisories; Evacuate area, if unsafe; Assess damage Earthquake The shaking of the earth's crust, caused by underground volcanic forces of breaking and shifting rock beneath the earth's surface Shut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption Fire (wild) Fires that originate in uninhabited areas and which pose the risk to spread to inhabited areas Attempt to suppress fire in early stages; Evacuate personnel on alarm, as necessary; Notify fire department; Shut off utilities; Monitor weather advisories Flood Flash flooding: Small creeks, gullies, dry streambeds, ravines, culverts or even low-lying areas flood quickly Monitor flood advisories; Determine flood potential to facilities; Pre-stage emergency power generating equipment; Assess damage Freezing rain Rain occurring when outside surface temperature is below freezing Monitor weather advisories; arrange for snow and ice removal Heat wave A prolonged period of excessively hot weather relative to the usual weather pattern of an area and relative to normal temperatures for the season Listen to weather advisories; Power-off all servers after a graceful shutdown if there is imminent potential of power failure; Shut down main electric circuit usually located in the basement or the first floor Hurricane Heavy rains and high winds Power off all equipment; listen to hurricane advisories; Evacuate area, if flooding is possible; Check gas, water and electrical lines for damage; Do not use telephones, in the event of severe lightning; Assess damage Landslide Geological phenomenon which includes a range of ground movement, such as rock falls, deep failure of slopes and shallow debris flows Shut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption Lightning strike An electrical discharge caused by lightning, typically during thunderstorms Power off all equipment; listen to hurricane advisories; Evacuate area, if flooding is possible; Check gas, water and electrical lines for damage; Do not use telephones, in the event of severe lightning; Assess damage Limnic eruption The sudden eruption of carbon dioxide from deep lake water Shut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption Tornado Violent rotating columns of air which descend from severe thunderstorm cloud systems Monitor tornado advisories; Power off equipment; Shut off utilities (power and gas); Assess damage once storm passes Tsunami A series of waves hitting shores strongly, mainly caused by the displacement of a large volume of a body of water, typically an ocean or a large lake, usually caused by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, underwater explosions, landslides, glacier calvings, meteorite impacts and other disturbances above or below water Power off all equipment; listen to tsunami advisories; Evacuate area, if flooding is possible; Check gas, water and electrical lines for damage; Assess damage Volcanic eruption The release of hot magma, volcanic ash and/or gases from a volcano Shut off utilities; Evacuate building if necessary; Determine impact on the equipment and facilities and any disruption Human-made Bioterrorism The intentional release or dissemination of biological agents as a means of coercion Get information immediately from public health officials via the news media as to the right course of action; If you think you have been exposed, quickly remove your clothing and wash off your skin; put on a HEPA to help prevent inhalation of the agentWhat should I do if there has been a bioterrorism attack?. Edmond A. Hooker. WebMD. 9 October 2007. Retrieved 18 September 2012. Civil unrest A disturbance caused by a group of people that may include sit-ins and other forms of obstructions, riots, sabotage and other forms of crime, and which is intended to be a demonstration to the public and the government, but can escalate into general chaos Contact local police or law enforcementReport of the Joint Fire/Police Task Force on Civil Unrest (FA-142): Recommendations for Organization and Operations During Civil Disturbance. Page 55. FEMA. Retrieved 21 October 2012.Business Continuity Planning: Developing a Strategy to Minimize Risk and Maintain Operations. Adam Booher. Retrieved 19 September 2012. Fire (urban) Even with strict building fire codes, people still perish in fires Attempt to suppress fire in early stages; Evacuate personnel on alarm, as necessary; Notify fire department; Shut off utilities; Monitor weather advisories Hazardous material spills The escape of solids, liquids, or gases that can harm people, other living organisms, property or the environment, from their intended controlled environment such as a container. Leave the area and call the local fire department for help.Hazardous Materials. Tennessee Emergency Management Office. Retrieved 7 September 2012. If anyone was affected by the spill, call your local Emergency Medical Services lineManaging Hazardous Materials Incidents (MHMIs). Center for Disease Control. Retrieved 7 September 2012. Nuclear and radiation accidents An event involving the significant release of radioactivity to the environment or a reactor core meltdown and which leads to major undesirable consequences to people, the environment, or the facility Recognize that a CBRN incident has or may occur. Gather, assess and disseminate all available information to first responders. Establish an overview of the affected area. Provide and obtain regular updates to and from first responders.Guidelines for First Response to a CBRN Incident. Project on Minimum Standards and Non-Binding Guidelines for First Responders Regarding Planning, Training, Procedure, and Equipment for Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN) Incidents.] NATO. Emergency Management. Retrieved 21 October 2012. Power failure Caused by summer or winter storms, lightning or construction equipment digging in the wrong location Wait 5–10 minutes; turn off all servers after a graceful shutdown; do not use telephones, in the event of severe lightning; shut down main electric circuit usually located in the basement or the first floor ==See also== * Act of God * Catastrophic failure * Disaster convergence * Disaster medicine * Disaster recovery * Disaster recovery and business continuity auditing * Disaster recovery plan * Disaster research * Disaster response * Emergency management * Environmental emergency * Human extinction * List of accidents and disasters by death toll * Lists of disasters ** List of man-made disasters in South Korea * Opportunism * Sociology of disaster == References == ==Further reading== * Barton, Allen H. Communities in Disaster: A Sociological Analysis of Collective Stress Situations, Doubleday, 1st edition 1969, ASIN: B0006BVVOW * Susanna M. Hoffman, Susanna M. & Anthony Oliver-Smith, authors & editors. Catastrophe and Culture: The Anthropology of Disaster, School of American Research Press, 1st edition 2002, * Bankoff, Greg, Georg Frerks, Dorothea Hilhorst. Mapping Vulnerability: Disasters, Development and People, Routledge, 2004, * Alexander, David. Principles of Emergency planning and Management, Oxford University Press, 1 edition 2002, * Quarantelli, E. L. (2008). "Conventional Beliefs and Counterintuitive Realities". Conventional Beliefs and Counterintuitive Realities in Social Research: an international Quarterly of the social Sciences, Vol. 75 (3): 873–904. * Paul, B. K et al. (2003). "Public Response to Tornado Warnings: a comparative Study of the 4 May 2003 Tornadoes in Kansas, Missouri and Tennessee". Quick Response Research Report, no 165, Natural Hazard Center, Universidad of Colorado * Kahneman, D. y Tversky, A. (1984). "Choices, Values and frames". American Psychologist 39 (4): 341–350. * Beck, U. (2006). Risk Society, towards a new modernity. Buenos Aires, Paidos * Aguirre, B. E & Quarantelli, E. H. (2008). "Phenomenology of Death Counts in Disasters: the invisible dead in the 9/11 WTC attack". International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters. Vol. 26 (1): 19–39. * Wilson, H. (2010). "Divine Sovereignty and The Global Climate Change debate". Essays in Philosophy. Vol. 11 (1): 1–7 * Uscher-Pines, L. (2009). "Health effects of Relocation following disasters: a systematic review of literature". Disasters. Vol. 33 (1): 1–22. * Scheper-Hughes, N. (2005). "Katrina: the disaster and its doubles". Anthropology Today. Vol. 21 (6). * Phillips, B. D. (2005). "Disaster as a Discipline: The Status of Emergency Management Education in the US". International Journal of Mass-Emergencies and Disasters. Vol. 23 (1): 111–140. * Mileti, D. and Fitzpatrick, C. (1992). "The causal sequence of Risk communication in the Parkfield Earthquake Prediction experiment". Risk Analysis. Vol. 12: 393–400. * Perkins, Jamey. "The Calamity of Disaster – Recognizing the possibilities, planning for the event, managing crisis and coping with the effects", Public Safety Degrees ==External links== * List of Disasters at ReliefWeb of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs * The Disaster Roundtable of the National Academy of Sciences * EM-DAT International Disaster Database of the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters * Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System – The Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System is a joint initiative of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the European Commission * UN-SPIDER – UN- SPIDER, the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency Response], a project of the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) .