Pink is the color of a namesake flower that is a pale tint of red.Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 5th Edition, Oxford University Press.Webster New World Dictionary, Third College Edition: "Any of a genus (Dianthus) of annual and perennial plants of the pink family with white, pink or red flowers.; its pale red color." It was first used as a color name in the late 17th century."pink, n.⁵ and adj.²", Oxford English Dictionary Online According to surveys in Europe and the United States, pink is the color most often associated with charm, politeness, sensitivity, tenderness, sweetness, childhood, femininity, and romance. A combination of pink and white is associated with chastity and innocence, whereas a combination of pink and black links to eroticism and seduction.Heller, Eva: Psychologie de la couleur – effets et symboliques, pp. 179-184 In the 21st century, pink is seen as a symbol of femininity, though this has not always been true; in the 1920s, pink was seen as a color that reflected masculinity. == In nature and culture == File:Color icon pink v2.svg|Various shades of pink File:Dianthus.jpg|The color pink takes its name from the flowers called pinks, members of the genus Dianthus. File:Rosa Queen Elizabeth1ZIXIETTE.jpg|In most European languages, pink is called rose or rosa, after the rose flower. File:Cherry blossoms in the Tsutsujigaoka Park.jpg|Cherry blossoms in Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. In Japanese the word for cherry blossom pink is (), and peach blossoms (). File:Greater Flamingoes (Phoenicopterus roseus) after taking off W2 IMG 9857.jpg|Greater pink flamingoes in flight over Pocharam Lake in Andhra Pradesh, India. File:Barite-Rhodochrosite-tcm01a.jpg|Rhodochrosite is one of the many pink gemstones. == Etymology and definitions == The color pink is named after the flowers, pinks, flowering plants in the genus Dianthus, and derives from the frilled edge of the flowers. The verb "to pink" dates from the 14th century and means "to decorate with a perforated or punched pattern" (possibly from German picken, "to peck").Collins Dictionary It has survived to the current day in pinking shears, hand-held scissors that cut a zig-zagged line to prevent fraying. == History, art and fashion == The color pink has been described in literature since ancient times. In the Odyssey, written in approximately 800 BCE, Homer wrote "Then, when the child of morning, rosy- fingered dawn appeared..."The Odyssey, Book XII, translated by Samuel Butler. Roman poets also described the color. Roseus is the Latin word meaning "rosy" or "pink." Lucretius used the word to describe the dawn in his epic poem On the Nature of Things (De rerum natura). Pink was not a common color in the fashion of the Middle Ages; nobles usually preferred brighter reds, such as crimson. However, it did appear in women's fashion and religious art. In the 13th and 14th centuries, in works by Cimabue and Duccio, the Christ child was sometimes portrayed dressed in pink, the color associated with the body of Christ. In the high Renaissance painting the Madonna of the Pinks by Raphael, the Christ child is presenting a pink flower to the Virgin Mary. The pink was a symbol of marriage, showing a spiritual marriage between the mother and child. During the Renaissance, pink was mainly used for the flesh color of faces and hands. The pigment commonly used for this was called light cinabrese; it was a mixture of the red earth pigment called sinopia, or Venetian red, and a white pigment called Bianco San Genovese, or lime white. In his famous 15th century manual on painting, Il Libro Dell'Arte, Cennino Cennini described it this way: "This pigment is made from the loveliest and lightest sinopia that is found and is mixed and mulled with St. John’s white, as it is called in Florence; and this white is made from thoroughly white and thoroughly purified lime. And when these two pigments have been thoroughly mulled together (that is, two parts cinabrese and the third white), make little loaves of them like half walnuts and leave them to dry. When you need some, take however much of it seems appropriate. And this pigment does you great credit if you use it for painting faces, hands, and nudes on walls..."Lara Broecke, Cennino Cennini's Il Libro dell'Arte: a New English Translation and Commentary with Italian Transcription, Archetype 2015, p. 62. File:East in Libadakia, Serifos, Greece.jpg|The Greek poet Homer wrote of "the child of morning, rose-fingered dawn" in the Odyssey. Sunrise at Serifos, Greece. File:Cimabue, The Virgin and Child Enthroned with Two Angels.jpg|In the early Renaissance, the infant Jesus was sometimes shown dressed in pink, the color associated with the body of Christ. This is The Virgin and Child Enthroned with Two Angels, by Cimabue. (1265–1280) File:Duccio di Buoninsegna - Madonna and Child (no. 593) - WGA06706.jpg|In the 1280s, Duccio also painted the Christ child dressed in pink File:Kneeling knight received a swan-crested helmet.jpg|A knight in red receiving a helmet from a damsel in pink, from an English manuscript of The Romance of Alexander (1338-1344). File:Raphael Madonna of the Pinks.jpg|In the painting Madonna of the Pinks by Raphael, c. 1506-07, the Christ Child gives a pink flower to the Virgin Mary, symbolizing the union between the mother and child. ===18th century=== The zenith of the color pink was the 18th century, when pastel colors became very fashionable in all the courts of Europe. Pink was particularly championed by Madame de Pompadour (1721–1764), the mistress of King Louis XV of France, who wore combinations of pale blue and pink, and had a particular tint of pink made for her by the Sevres porcelain factory, created by adding nuances of blue, black and yellow.Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur, effets et symboliques, pp. 182-83 While pink was quite evidently the color of seduction in the portraits made by George Romney of Emma, Lady Hamilton, the future mistress of Admiral Horatio Nelson, in the late 18th century, it had the completely opposite meaning in the portrait of Sarah Barrett Moulton painted by Thomas Lawrence in 1794. In this painting, it symbolized childhood, innocence and tenderness. Sarah Moulton was just eleven years of age when the picture was painted, and died the following year. File:Boucher, François - Marquise de Pompadour at the Toilet-Table.jpg|Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of Louis XV of France, made pink and blue the leading fashion colors in the Court of Versailles. She had a special pink tint created for her by the Sevres porcelain factory. This portrait by François Boucher was painted in 1758. File:Galerie des Modes 3.jpg|Pink had become a popular color throughout Europe by the late 18th century. It was associated with both romanticism and seduction. This fashion plate is from 1778–1787. File:George Romney - Lady Hamilton (as a Bacchante) 3.jpg|Emma, Lady Hamilton, later the mistress of Admiral Horatio Nelson, had herself painted by English painter George Romney posing as a Bacchante, dressed in pink. (1782–1784) File:Pinkie detailed.jpg|The portrait of Sarah Moulton, popularly known as "Pinkie", by Sir Thomas Lawrence (1794). Here pink represented youth, innocence and tenderness. File:D'Holbach.jpg|Paul-Henri Thiry, Baron d'Holbach by Louis Carmontelle. Pink was worn regardless of gender. ===19th century=== In 19th century England, pink ribbons or decorations were often worn by young boys; boys were simply considered small men, and while men in England wore red uniforms, boys wore pink. In fact the clothing for children in the 19th century was almost always white, since, before the invention of chemical dyes, clothing of any color would quickly fade when washed in boiling water. Queen Victoria was painted in 1850 with her seventh child and third son, Prince Arthur, who wore white and pink. In late nineteenth-century France, Impressionist painters working in a pastel color palette sometimes depicted women wearing the color pink, such as Edgar Degas’ image of ballet dancers or Mary Cassatt’s images of women and children. File:Queen Victoria with Prince Arthur.jpg|Queen Victoria in 1850 or 1851 with her third son and seventh child, Prince Arthur. In the 19th century, baby boys often wore white and pink. Pink was seen as a masculine color, while girls often wore white and blue. File:American School, Young Boy with Whip, ca. 1840.jpg|Young boy in pink, American school of painting (about 1840). Both girls and boys wore pink in the 19th century. File:Princesaleopoldina.jpg|Princess Leopoldina of Brazil in pink gown (1853) File:Edgar Germain Hilaire Degas 079.jpg|Dancers in pink, between scenes. Edgar Degas File:Claude Monet - Springtime - Google Art Project.jpg|The Impressionist painter Claude Monet used pink, blue and green to capture the effects of light and shadows on a white dress in Springtime (1872). File:Girl in a Bonnet Tied with a Large Pink Bow by Mary Cassatt.jpg|Mary Cassatt, Girl in a Bonnet Tied with a Large Pink Bow, 1909. Oil on canvas (68 x 57.2 cm). Private Collection. === 20th century - present === A dress parade, held in 1949, at the famous Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York, caused a stir among attendees due to the vibrant pink tones in the dresses and garments. The journalists and critics of the time, seeking to know Mexican designer Ramón Valdiosera's inspiration, asked him about the origin of the color. The artist simply replied that that pink was already part of Mexican culture, which the New York fashion critic Perle Mesta then described as Mexican Pink. The First inauguration of Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953), when Eisenhower's wife Mamie Eisenhower wore a pink dress as her inaugural gown, is thought to have been a key turning point in the association of pink as a color associated with girls. Mamie's strong liking of pink led to the public association with pink being a color that "ladylike women wear." The 1957 American musical Funny Face also played a role in cementing the color's association with women.Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: In the 20th century, pinks became bolder, brighter, and more assertive, partly because of the invention of chemical dyes that did not fade. The pioneer in the creation of the new wave of pinks was the Italian designer Elsa Schiaparelli, (1890-1973), who was aligned with the artists of the surrealist movement, including Jean Cocteau. In 1931 she created a new variety of the color, called shocking pink, made by mixing magenta with a small amount of white. She launched a perfume called Shocking, sold in a bottle in the shape of a woman's torso, said to be modelled on that of Mae West. Her fashions, co-designed with artists like Cocteau, featured the new pinks.Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques, p. 184. In Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s, inmates of Nazi concentration camps who were accused of homosexuality were forced to wear a pink triangle.The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War Against Homosexuals (1986) by Richard Plant (New Republic Books). . Because of this, the pink triangle has become a symbol of the modern gay rights movement. The transition to pink as a sexually differentiating color for girls occurred gradually, through the selective process of the marketplace, in the 1930s and 40s. In the 1920s, some groups had described pink as a masculine color, an equivalent to red, which was considered for men but lighter for boys. But stores nonetheless found that people were increasingly choosing to buy pink for girls, and blue for boys, until this became an accepted norm in the 1940s.Smithsonian Magazine When Did Girls Start Wearing Pink? In 1927, Time magazine printed a chart showing sex-appropriate colors for girls and boys according to leading U.S. stores. In Boston, Filene’s told parents to dress boys in pink. So did Best & Co. in New York City, Halle’s in Cleveland, and Marshall Field in Chicago. Today’s color dictate wasn’t established until the 1940s due to Americans’ preferences as interpreted by manufacturers and retailers. “It could have gone the other way” File:mamie eisenhower.gif|Mamie Eisenhower in her pink inaugural gown, painted in 1953 by Thomas Stevens File:Shocking Pink Schiaparelli.jpg|Shocking pink, a mix of magenta with a little white, was the signature color of Italian fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli. File:Dinner in Honor of Andre Malraux.jpg|Jacqueline Kennedy, the wife of President John F. Kennedy, made pink a popular high-fashion color. File:Gentlemen Prefer Blondes Movie Trailer Screenshot (34).jpg|Pink combined with black or violet is associated with seduction. Marilyn Monroe in the trailer for the film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953). File:Kelly Sullivan at the Oscars.jpg|Pink lipstick is thought to attract attention and harmonize with flesh colors, clothes, and fashion accessories. File:DebrettevillePink.jpg|Detail of "Pink," a poster created by Sheila de Bretteville in 1973. It was meant to explore the notions of gender associated with the color pink for an American Institute of Graphic Arts exhibition about color. File:Royal Wedding Stockholm 2010-Lejonbacken-012 (cropped).jpg|Queen Silvia of Sweden wearing a pink dress and the Pink Topaz Demi-Parure paired with a diamond tiara, 2010 == Science and nature == === Optics === In optics, the word "pink" can refer to any of the pale shades of colors between bluish red to red in hue, of medium to high lightness, and of low to moderate saturation. Although pink is generally considered a tint of red, the colors of most tints of pink are slightly bluish, and lie between red and magenta. A few variations of pink, such as salmon color, lean toward orange. ===Sunrises and sunsets=== As a ray of white sunlight travels through the atmosphere, some of the colors are scattered out of the beam by air molecules and airborne particles. This is called Rayleigh scattering. Colors with a shorter wavelength, such as blue and green, scatter more strongly, and are removed from the light that finally reaches the eye. At sunrise and sunset, when the path of the sunlight through the atmosphere to the eye is longest, the blue and green components are removed almost completely, leaving the longer wavelength orange, red and pink light. The remaining pinkish sunlight can also be scattered by cloud droplets and other relatively large particles, which give the sky above the horizon a pink or reddish glow. File:Sunrise in Southeast Alaska - NOAA.jpg|Sunrise in southeast Alaska. Sunsets and sunrises are sometimes pink because of an optical effect called Rayleigh scattering. File:Sunset in santa monica.jpg|Sunset in Santa Monica, California. ===Geology=== File:Topaz-170679.jpg|Pink topaz from Ouro Preto, Brazil. File:Corundum-215337.jpg|Corundum, or pink sapphire, from the Dodoma Region of Tanzania File:Calcite-163756.jpg|Calcite from Bou Azzer, Morocco File:Barite-Rhodochrosite-tcm01a.jpg|Barite-Rhodochrosite from the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in China. File:Clinochlore- tuc1030y.jpg|Clinochlore from Erzerum Province, Turkey File:Raw rose quartz.jpg|alt=Rough rose quartz|Rough rose quartz File:Quad Riding sand (3662075336).jpg|Coral Pink Sand Dunes State Park in Utah. The colour is from Navajo Sandstone, reddish hematite mixed with white quartz grains File:Angels Landing 17 (4211104246).jpg|Angel's Landing in Zion National Park in Utah is made of pink sandstone. File:Plage de sable rose à Tikehau.JPG|A pink sand beach on Tikehau in French Polynesia ===Biology=== File:Strigilla carnaria.jpg|A Strigilla carnaria shell from Dominica, in the West Indies. File:Frogfish ocellated.jpg|An Ocelated frogfish (Antennarius ocellatus), from East Timor. The frogfish is camouflaged to look like a rock covered with algae or seaweed; it lies motionless and waits for its prey to come to it. File:Iggy pink.jpg|The pink iguana of the Galapagos Islands was first identified in 1986 and first recognized as a distinct species in 2009. File:Sousa chinensis head.jpg|The Pink Dolphin is a freshwater river dolphin which lives in the Orinoco, Amazon and Araguaia/Tocantins River systems of Brazil, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela. It is an endangered species and has a brain 40% larger than a human's. File:2012-kruger-albino-elephant.jpg|The so-called "white elephant" is revered in several countries in Southeast Asia and is naturally pinkish gray. They are actually albino elephants. File:Sow with piglet.jpg|The pig has been domesticated over ten thousand years and selectively bred to have a pink skin, without melanin, which farmers traditionally have preferred to a dark color. File:Flamingos Laguna Colorada.jpg|Flamingoes in Laguna Colorada, Bolivia. The pink or reddish color of flamingos comes from carotenoid proteins in their diet of animal and plant plankton. An unhealthy or malnourished flamingo, or one kept in captivity and not fed sufficient carotene, is usually pale or white. File:Roseate Spoonbill - Myakka River State Park.jpg|A Roseate spoonbill in Myakka River State Park in Florida. Its pink color, like that of the flamingo, comes from the carotenoid pigments in its diet. File:Lophochroa leadbeateri -Palmitos Park, Gran Canaria, Spain -mating-8a.jpg|The Lophochroa leadbeateri, commonly known as Major Mitchell's Cockatoo or the pink cockatoo, is a native of the arid interior regions of Australia. File:Lake Hillier 2 Middle Island Recherche Archipelago NR IV-2011.JPG|Lake Hillier, Australia, the colour is caused by algae ===Pink coloration of meat and seafood=== Raw beef is red, because the muscles of vertebrate animals, such as cows and pigs, contain a protein called myoglobin, which binds oxygen and iron atoms. When beef is cooked, the myoglobin proteins undergo oxidation, and gradually turn from red to pink to brown; that is, from rare to medium to well-done. Pork contains less myoglobin than beef and therefore is less red; when heated, it changes from pinkish-red to less pink to tan or white. Ham, though it contains myoglobins like beef, undergoes a different transformation. Traditional hams, such as prosciutto, are made by taking the hind leg or thigh of a pig, covering it with sea salt, which removes the moisture content, and then letting it dry or cure for as long as two years. The salt (sodium nitrate) permits the ham to retain its original pink color, even when dried out. Supermarket hams are made by a different and faster process; they are brined, or infused with a salt-water solution, containing sodium nitrite, which transfers nitric oxide, which bonds with the myoglobin to form the traditional pink cured ham color. The shells and flesh of crustaceans such as crabs, lobsters and shrimp contain a pink carotenoid pigment called astaxanthin. Their shells, naturally blue-green, turn pink or red when cooked. The flesh of the salmon also contains astaxanthin, which makes it pink. Farm-bred salmon are sometimes fed these pigments to improve their pinkness, and it is sometimes also used to enhance the color of egg yolks. File:Rostas (ready and served).JPG|Roast beef gets its distinctive pink color from myoglobin, which gradually turns from red to pink to brown (rare to medium to well-done) when heated. File:Prosciutto.jpg|Prosciutto hams also get their pink color from salt combined with the natural protein called myoglobin. File:Shelled northern shrimp.jpg|The shells and flesh of steamed shrimp contain a natural carotenoid pigment called astaxanthin, which turns pink when heated. The same process turns cooked lobster and crab from blue-green to red when they are boiled. File:Asparagus with salmon.jpg|The meat of the salmon is also colored pink by the natural carotenoid pigment called astaxanthin. ===Plants and flowers=== Pink is one of the most common colors of flowers; it serves to attract the insects and birds necessary for pollination and perhaps also to deter predators. The color comes from natural pigments called anthocyanins, which also provide the pink in raspberries. Pink_Rose_In_The_Rain_(216504571).jpg|A pink rose in the rain. Clematite_chantily_01.JPG|A clematis Chantilly. Flickr_-_brewbooks_-_Pink_Hibiscus_-_Brisbane_(1).jpg|A pink hibiscus from Australia. Tulip cv. 26.JPG|Pink tulips in the botanical gardens of Moscow State University. Dahlia_-_%22Gilt_Edge%22_cultivar.jpg|A pink dahlia Gemeine_Pfingstrose.JPG|A pink peony. Magnolia 'Susan' 03.JPG|A flower of a magnolia tree Rhododendron_catawbiense_01.JPG|A pink rhododendron Spiraea_japonica_Alpina3.jpg|Spiraea japonica flowers. Cerisier_du_Japon_Prunus_serrulata.jpg|A Japanese cherry tree (Prunus serrulata) in bloom. Hyazinthen.JPG|Pink hyacinth flowers Phlox paniculata.jpg|Phlox paniculata === Pigments - Pinke === In the 17th century, the word pink or pinke was also used to describe a yellowish pigment, which was mixed with blue colors to yield greenish colors. Thomas Jenner's A Book of Drawing, Limning, Washing (1652) categorises "Pink & blew bice" amongst the greens (p. 38), and specifies several admixtures of greenish colors made with pink—e.g. "Grasse-green is made of Pink and Bice, it is shadowed with Indigo and Pink … French-green of Pink and Indico [shadowed with] Indico" (pp. 38–40). In William Salmon's Polygraphice (1673), "Pink yellow" is mentioned amongst the chief yellow pigments (p. 96), and the reader is instructed to mix it with either Saffron or Ceruse for "sad" or "light" shades thereof, respectively. === Sonics === * Pink noise (), also known as 1/f noise, in audio engineering is a signal or process with a frequency spectrum such that the power spectral density is proportional to the reciprocal of the frequency. === Lighting === *Grow lights often use a combination of red and blue wavelengths, which generally appear pink to the human eye. *Pink neon signs are generally produced using one of two different methods. One method is to use neon gas and a blue or purple phosphor, which generally produces a warmer (more reddish) or more intense shade of pink. Another method is to use an argon/mercury blend and a red phosphor, which generally produces a cooler (more purplish) or softer shade of pink. *Pink LEDs can be produced using two methods, either with a blue LED using two phosphors (yellow for the first phosphor, and red, orange, or pink for the second), or by placing a pink dye on top of a white LED. Color shifting was a common issue with early pink LEDs, where the red, orange, or pink phosphors or dyes faded over time, causing the pink color to eventually shift towards white or blue. These issues have been mitigated by the more recent introduction of more fade-resistant phosphors. === Engineering === *Insulation manufactured by Owens Corning is dyed pink, with the Pink Panther as its corporate mascot. The company holds a trademark on the color pink for insulation products in order to prevent competitors from using it, and is the first company in the United States to trademark a color. *The United States Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices specifies fluorescent pink as an optional color for traffic signs used for incident management as an alternative to the traditional orange in order to distinguish them from construction zone signs. == In symbolism and culture == ===Common associations and popularity=== According to public opinion surveys in Europe and the United States, pink is the color most associated with charm, politeness, sensitivity, tenderness, sweetness, softness, childhood, the feminine, and the romantic.Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques, p. 179-185 Although it did not have any strong negative associations in these surveys, few respondents chose pink as their favorite color. Pink was the favorite color of only two percent of respondents.Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques, p. 179. There was a notable difference between men and women in regards to a preference for pink; three percent of women chose pink as their favorite color, compared with less than one percent of men. Many of the men surveyed were unable to even identify pink correctly, confusing it with mauve. Pink was also more popular with older people than younger.Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques, p. 179 In Japan, pink is the color most commonly associated with springtime due to the blooming cherry blossoms. This is different from surveys in the United States and Europe where green is the color most associated with springtime. ===Pink in other languages=== In many languages, the word for the color pink is based on the name of the rose flower; like rose in French; roze in Dutch; rosa in German, Latin, Portuguese, Catalan, Spanish, Italian, Swedish and Norwegian (Nynorsk and Bokmål); rozovyy/розовый in Russian; różowy in Polish; ורוד (varód) in Hebrew; গোলাপি (golapi) in Bangla; and गुलाबी (gulābee) in Hindi. In English "rose", too, often refers to both the flower and the color. In Danish, Faroese and Finnish, the color pink is described as a lighter shade of red: lyserød in Danish, ljósareyður in Faroese and vaaleanpunainen in Finnish, all meaning "light red". Similarly, some Celtic languages use a term meaning "whitish red": gwynnrudh in Cornish, bándearg in Irish, bane-yiarg in Manx, bàn-dhearg in Scottish Gaelic (which also uses liath-dhearg "greyish/pale red" and pinc from English). In Icelandic, the color is called bleikur, originally meaning "pale". In the Japanese language, the traditional word for pink, , takes its name from the peach blossom. There is a separate word for the color of the cherry blossom: sakura-iro. In recent times a word based on the English version, , has begun to be used. In Chinese, the color pink is named with a compound noun 粉紅色, meaning "powder red" where the powder refers to substances used for women's make-up. The Thai word for the color, ชมพู (chom-puu), derives ultimately from Sanskrit जम्बू (jambū) "rose apple". ===Idioms and expressions=== * In the pink. To be in top form, in good health, in good condition. In Romeo and Juliet, Mercutio says; "I am the very pink of courtesy." Romeo: Pink for flower? Mercutio: Right. Romeo: Then my pump is well flowered."Romeo and Juliet, Act 2, Scene 4 * To see pink elephants means to hallucinate from alcoholism. The expression was used by American novelist Jack London in his book John Barleycorn in 1913. * Pink slip. To be given a pink slip means to be fired or dismissed from a job. It was first recorded in 1915 in the United States. * The phrase "pink-collar worker" refers to persons working in jobs conventionally regarded as "women's work". * Pink money, the pink pound or pink dollar is an economic term which refers to the spending power of the LGBT community. Advertising agencies sometimes call the gay market the pink economy. * Tickled pink means extremely pleased. * The Pink Tax refers to the invisible price women must pay for goods that are created and advertised specifically for them. It is the tendency for products targeted specifically toward women to be more expensive than those targeted toward men. ===Architecture=== Early pink buildings were usually built of brick or sandstone, which takes its pale red color from hematite, or iron ore. In the 18th century - the golden age of pink and other pastel colors - pink mansions and churches were built all across Europe. More modern pink buildings usually use the color pink to appear exotic or to attract attention. File:2018-10-19 Buenos Aires by Sandro Halank–002.jpg|Casa Rosada, or the "Pink House", in Buenos Aires, built between 1713 and 1855 as a fort and then customs house, is the official residence and office of the President of Argentina. File:Vääksy - Vesijärventie 1.jpg|A pink building in Vääksy, Asikkala, Finland. File:Kannur City Centre, Kerala, India.jpg|The City Center in Kannur, India. File:Ostankino Palace (4325331247).jpg|Ostankino Palace, outside of Moscow, is an 18th-century country house built by Pyotr Sheremetev, then the richest man in Russia. File:Macau Government Headquarters 01.JPG|Macau Government Headquarters (1849), an example of Portuguese colonial architecture and the Pombaline style in Macau. File:Royal Hawaiian Hotel seen from the sea.jpg|The Royal Hawaiian Hotel in Honolulu, Hawaii, built in 1927, was the first hotel on Waikiki Beach. Its pink color was designed to match an exotic setting, and to contrast with the blue of the sea and green of the landscape. File:Interesting Building Angle of Georgia-Pacific Tower Atlanta.jpg|The Georgia-Pacific Tower in Atlanta, Georgia (1981), a modernist pink skyscraper. File:Canada Place Building Edmonton.jpg|Canada Place Building, in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (1988) a post-modernist style government office building. File:USBancorpTowerI5k.jpg|"big Pink" The US Bancorp Tower in Portland, Oregon pink granite and windows(ground breaking 1981 dedicated 1983) File:Norfolk Royale Hotel - geograph.org.uk - 16384.jpg|The Norfolk Royale Hotel in Bournemouth, England was built between 1840 and 1850. File:BahamianParliamentPanorama.jpg|The Bahamian Parliament Building was built in 1815. File:삼풍백화점.jpg|The Sampoong Department Store collapse in Seoul, South Korea (1987 to 1995) File:Palácio das Necessidades 1997.JPG|Necessidades Palace, headquarters of the Portuguese Foreign Ministry. It served previously as a royal residence. File:Museu Imperial 03 (cropped).JPG|The Imperial Museum of Brazil. Formerly used as the summer residence by the Brazilian imperial family. === Food and beverages === According to surveys in Europe and the United States, pink is the color most associated with sweet foods and beverages. Pink is also one of the few colors to be strongly associated with a particular aroma, that of roses.Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur – effets et symboliques Many strawberry and raspberry-flavored foods are colored pink and light red as well, sometimes to distinguish them from cherry-flavored foods that are more commonly colored dark red (although raspberry-flavored foods, particularly in the United States, are often colored blue as well). The drink Tab was packaged in pink cans, presumably to subconsciously convey a sweet taste. The pink color in most packaged and processed foods, ice creams, candies and pastries is made with artificial food coloring. The most common pink food coloring is erythrosine, also known as Red No. 3, an organoiodine compound, a derivative of fluorone, which is a cherry-pink synthetic.Phyllis A. Lyday "Iodine and Iodine Compounds" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2005, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim It is usually listed on package labels as E-127. Another common red or pink (particularly in the United States where erythrosine is less frequently used) is Allura Red AC (E-129), also known as Red No. 40. Some products use a natural red or pink food coloring, Cochineal, also called carmine, made with crushed insects of the family Dactylopius coccus. File:Choco pink.jpg|Pink is the color most commonly associated with sweet tastes File:Strawberry Ice Cream Cone (5076899310).jpg|A strawberry ice cream cone File:Pink Cotton Candy.jpg|Cotton candy File:Macarons filled with raspberries at Lawry's The Prime Rib, Mandarin Orchard Singapore - 20100309.jpg|A macaron with raspberries File:Bunga Kuda.jpg|Bunga kuda (also known as bunga pundak) is a traditional dessert in Malaysia, containing a coconut filling File:Chi chi dango.jpg|Chi chi dango is a sweet dessert made of rice flour. It is of Japanese origin, and very popular in Hawaii File:Bandol rose.jpg|Traditional rosé wines get their color when temporarily fermented with dark purple grapeskins File:Rose Champagne Bubbles.jpg|Pink champagne takes its color either when temporarily fermented with the skins of dark purple grapes, or by adding a small amount of red wine === Gender === In Europe and the United States, pink is often associated with girls, while blue is associated with boys. These colors were first used as gender signifiers just prior to World War I (for either girls or boys), and pink was first established as a female gender signifier in the 1940s.Jo B. Paoletti, Pink and Blue: Telling the Girls From the Boys in America (Indiana University Press, 2012), 87 In the 20th century, the practice in Europe varied from country to country, with some assigning colors based on the baby's complexion, and others assigning pink sometimes to boys and sometimes to girls. ManySmithsonian.com: Jeanne Maglaty, "When Did Girls Start Wearing Pink?," April 8, 2011, accessed June 4, 2011Merkin, Daphne. "Gender Trouble", The New York Times Style Magazine, March 12, 2006. Retrieved 10 December 2007.Orenstein, Peggy. "What's Wrong With Cinderella?", The New York Times Magazine, December 24, 2006, retrieved December 10, 2007. Orenstein writes: "When colors were first introduced to the nursery in the early part of the 20th century, pink was considered the more masculine hue, a pastel version of red. Blue, with its intimations of the Virgin Mary, constancy and faithfulness, was thought to be dainty. Why or when that switched is not clear, but as late as the 1930s a significant percentage of adults in one national survey held to that split."Kimmell, Michael. Manhood in America: A Cultural History, 1996, The Free Press. p.158 have noted the contrary association of pink with boys in 20th-century America. An article in the trade publication Earnshaw's Infants' Department in June 1918 said: One reason for the increased use of pink for girls and blue for boys was the invention of new chemical dyes, which meant that children's clothing could be mass-produced and washed in hot water without fading. Prior to this time, most small children of both sexes wore white, which could be frequently washed.Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur; effets et symboliques. Another factor was the popularity of blue and white sailor suits for young boys, a fashion that started in the late 19th century. Blue was also the usual color of school uniforms, for boys and girls. Blue was associated with seriousness and study, while pink was associated with childhood and softness. By the 1950s, pink was strongly associated with femininity but to an extent that was "neither rigid nor universal" as it later became.Paoletti, 92 One study by two neuroscientists in Current Biology examined color preferences across British and Chinese cultures and found significant differences between male and female responses. Both groups favored blues over other hues, but women had more favorable responses to the reddish- purple range of the spectrum and men had more favorable responses to the greenish-yellow middle of the spectrum. Despite the fact that the study used adults in mainstream cultures, and both groups preferred blues, and responses to the color pink were never even tested, the popular press represented the research as an indication of an innate preference by girls for pink. The misreading has been often repeated in market research, reinforcing American culture's association of pink with girls on the basis of imagined innate characteristics.Paoletti, 97-8 As of 2008 various feminist groups and the Breast Cancer Awareness Month use the color pink to convey empowerment of women."Pink: The Color." "Part 2: Girl Culture A to Z" - In: Mitchell, Claudia and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh (editors). Girl Culture: Studying girl culture : a readers' guide or Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia Volume 1. ABC-CLIO (Greenwood Publishing Group), 2008. , 9780313339097. p. 473. "It is important to note its significance to femininity as a Western phenomenon, because the color is a sign of masculinity in Japan and signifies a welcome embrace in India.[...]of pink with femininity has been strategically used in gendered terms to convey strength and pride: pink is the color of Breast Cancer Awareness Month, and many feminist groups have adopted the color pink as a sign of empowerment." - See Google Books search result Breast cancer charities around the world have used the color to symbolize support for people with breast cancer and promote awareness of the disease. A key tactic of these charities is encouraging women and men to wear pink to show their support for breast cancer awareness and research. Pink has symbolized a "welcome embrace" in India and masculinity in Japan. File:Female baby.jpg|In the United States and Europe, baby girls are often dressed in pink and white. File:Pierre-Auguste Renoir - Sailor Boy (Portrait of Robert Nunès) - BF325 - Barnes Foundation.jpg|Boy in a sailor suit (1883). The blue sailor suit helped make blue instead of pink the color for boys in the 20th century. File:Shriya Saran bridal week 2010.png|Indian actress Shriya Saran. In many cultures, pink is associated with femininity. File:Herero women.jpg|Women of the Herero people from Namibia. Pink stands out. File:Three Nuns in Pink (8398117658).jpg|Three nuns in pink in Yangon, Burma. File:"Gender reveal" cake cut open.jpg|thumb|A cake with a pink middle layer indicating a baby girl at a gender reveal party === Toys === Toys aimed at girls often display pink prominently on packaging and the toy themselves. This is a relatively recent trend, with toys from the 1920s to the 1960s not being gendered by color (though they were gendered by a focus on domesticity and nurturing). The current color-based gendering of toys can be traced back to the deregulation of children's television programs. This allowed toy companies to produce shows that were designed specifically to sell their products, and gender was an important differentiator of these shows and the toys they were advertising. In its 1957 catalog, Lionel Trains offered for sale a pink model freight train for girls. The steam locomotive and coal car were pink and the freight cars of the freight train were various pastel colors. The caboose was baby blue. It was a marketing failure because any girl who might want a model train would want a realistically colored train, while boys in the 1950s did not want to be seen playing with a pink train. However, today it is a valuable collector's item. ===Sexuality=== As noted above, pink combined with black or violet is commonly associated with eroticism and seduction. * In street slang, the pink sometimes refers to the vagina. * In Russian, pink (розовый, rozovyj) is used to refer to lesbians, and light blue (голубой, goluboj) refers to gay men. * In Japan, a genre of low budget, erotic cinema is referred to as . * In India, Pink coloured turbans are worn at Hindu weddings. === Politics === * Pink, being a 'watered-down' red, is sometimes used in a derogatory way to describe a person with mild communist or socialist beliefs (see Pinko). * The term little pink (小粉红) is used to describe the young nationalists on the internet in Mainland China. * The term pink revolution is sometimes used to refer to the overthrow of President Askar Akayev and his government in the Central Asian republic of Kyrgyzstan after the parliamentary elections of February 27 and March 13, 2005, although it is more commonly called the Tulip Revolution. * The Swedish feminist party Feminist Initiative uses pink as their color. * Code Pink is an American women's anti-globalization and anti-war group founded in 2002 by activist Medea Benjamin. The group has disrupted Congressional hearings and heckled President Obama at his public speeches. *The TRS party of Telangana, India has pink as its primary color *It was a common practice to color the British Empire pink on maps. *Supporters of Philippine Presidential candidate and former Vice President Leni Robredo used pink to show their solidarity with her in her 2022 presidential campaign. ===Social movements=== Pink is often used as a symbolic color by groups involved in issues important to women, as well as to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. * A Dutch newsgroup about homosexuality is called nl.roze (roze being the Dutch word for pink), while in Britain, Pink News is a gay newspaper and online news service. There is a magazine called Pink for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community which has different editions for various metropolitan areas. In France Pink TV is an LGBT cable channel. * In Ireland, Support group for Irish Pink Adoptions defines a pink family as a relatively neutral umbrella term for the single gay men, single lesbians, or same-gender couples who intend to adopt, are in the process of adopting, or have adopted. It also covers adults born/raised in such families. The group welcome the input of other people touched by adoption, especially people who were adopted as children and are now adults. * Pinkstinks, a campaign founded in London in May 2008 to raise awareness of what they claim is the damage caused by gender stereotyping of children. * The Pink Pistols is a gay gun rights organization. * The pink ribbon is the international symbol of breast cancer awareness. Pink was chosen partially because it is so strongly associated with femininity. File:Pink ribbon.svg|The pink ribbon has been a symbol of breast cancer awareness since 1991. File:P20171001MC-0035 (36802991953).jpg|The White House illuminated in pink for Breast Cancer Awareness Month. === Academic dress === * In the French academic dress system, the five traditional fields of study (Arts, Science, Medicine, Law and Divinity) are each symbolized by a distinctive color, which appears in the academic dress of the people who graduated in this field. Redcurrant, an extremely red shade of pink, is the distinctive color for Medicine (and other health-related fields) :fr:Groseille (couleur). === Heraldry === The word pink is not used for any tincture (color) in heraldry, but there are two fairly uncommon tinctures which are both close to pink: * The heraldic color of rose is a modern innovation, mostly used in Canadian heraldry, depicting a reddish pink color like the shade usually called rose. * In French heraldry, the color carnation is sometimes used, corresponding to the skin color of a light skinned Caucasian human. This can also be seen as a pink shade but is usually depicted slightly more brownish beige than the rose tincture. === Calendars === * In Thailand, pink is associated with Tuesday on the Thai solar calendar. Anyone may wear pink on Tuesdays, and anyone born on a Tuesday may adopt pink as their color. === The press === Pink is used for the newsprint paper of several important newspapers devoted to business and sports, and the color is also connected with the press aimed at the gay community. Since 1893 the London Financial Times newspaper has used a distinctive salmon pink color for its newsprint, originally because pink dyed paper was less expensive than bleached white paper.Cited by Stephen Fidler of the Wall Street Journal, formerly a correspondent for the Financial Times. Today the color is used to distinguish the newspaper from competitors on a press kiosk or news stand. In some countries, the salmon press identifies economic newspapers or economics sections in "white" newspapers. Some sports newspapers, such as La Gazzetta dello Sport in Italy, also use pink paper to stand out from other newspapers. It awards a pink jersey to the winner of Italy's most important bicycle race, the Giro d'Italia. (See #Sports). === Law === * In England and Wales, a brief delivered to a barrister by a solicitor is usually tied with pink ribbon. Pink was traditionally the color associated with the defense, while white ribbons may have been used for the prosecution. === Literature === * In Spanish and Italian, a romantic novel is known as a "pink novel" (novela rosa in Spanish, romanzo rosa in Italian). * In Nathaniel Hawthorne's 1835 short story, Young Goodman Brown, Faith is wearing a pink ribbon in her hair which represents her innocence.As he moves out of the darkness, a pink ribbon blows down next to him and he sees that Faith is part of the "communion" that is taking place in the woods. * Carl Surely's short story "Dinsdale's Pink" is a coming of age tale of a young man growing up in Berlin in the 1930s, dealing with issues of gender, sexuality and politics. * In Louisa May Alcott’s 1868-69 book Little Women, Amy March uses blue and pink ribbons to tell the difference between her sister Meg's newborn twins. === Religion === * In the Yogic Hindu, Shaktic Hindu and Tantric Buddhist traditions rose is one of the colors of the fourth primary energy center, the heart chakra Anahata. The other color is green. * In Catholicism, pink (called rose by the Catholic Church) symbolizes joy and happiness. It is used for the Third Sunday of Advent (Gaudete Sunday) and the Fourth Sunday of Lent (Laetare Sunday) to mark the halfway point in these seasons of penance. For this reason, one of the candles in an Advent wreath may be pink, rather than purple. * Pink is the color most associated with Indian spiritual leader Meher Baba, who often wore pink coats to please his closest female follower, Mehera Irani, and today pink remains an important color, symbolizing love, to Baba's followers. *In Paganism, it represents affection, friendship, companionship, and spiritual healing. It is often used for love spells. === Sports === * Palermo, a soccer team based in Palermo, Italy, traditionally wears pink home jerseys. * Cerezo Osaka, a soccer team based in Osaka, Japan, typically wears pink home shirts. Cerezo is the spanish translation for cherry tree, which are known for its pink blossoms. * Inter Miami, a soccer team based in South Florida, USA, features pink home shirts. The club wore white home shirts in its first two seasons in existence. * In Major League Baseball, pink bats are used by baseball players on Mother's Day as part of a week-long program to benefit Susan G. Komen for the Cure. * Pink can mean the scarlet coat worn in fox hunting (a.k.a. "riding to hounds"). One legend about the origin of this meaning refers to a tailor named Pink (or Pinke, or Pinque). * The leader in the Giro d'Italia cycle race wears a pink jersey (maglia rosa); this reflects the distinctive pink-colored newsprint of the sponsoring Italian La Gazzetta dello Sport newspaper. * The University of Iowa's Kinnick Stadium visitors' locker room is painted pink. The decor has sparked controversy, perceived by some people as suggesting sexism and homophobia. * WWE Hall of Famer Bret Hart, as well as other members of the Hart wrestling family, is known for his pink and black wrestling attire. * The Western Hockey League team Calgary Hitmen originally wore pink as a tribute to the aforementioned Bret Hart, who was a part team owner at the time. * Snooker uses a pink-coloured object ball that is worth 6pts when legally potted. * Formula One constructors Force India and Racing Point used pink as the primary color on their cars during the 2017–2020 seasons. At the 2017 United States Grand Prix, the purple side-wall branding on the ultra-soft compound tire was replaced by pink for the race to raise awareness of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Several teams also incorporated pink into their liveries to support the cause (except Force India, whose cars were pink to begin with). * To distinguish tuned performance models from ordinary ones, Subaru uses a badge with a pink background on their cars. Also the logo of their motorsports arm Subaru Tecnica International is colored pink. * The NFL among other sports have incorporated pink into their promotions, team uniforms and equipment during the month of October in support of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. === Music === * The names of the music artists Pink Floyd, Pink, Momoiro Clover Z and Blackpink use the color as an influence. == See also == * Fuchsia (color) * Lists of colors * Pinkstinks * Rosé, a wine whose color is between red and white * Shades of pink == References == === Further reading === * * * Boston Museum of Fine Arts, Think Pink, 2014. Exhibition Link * Susan Stamberg/NPR, "Girls Are Taught To 'Think Pink,' But That Wasn't Always So, 2014. Story link. === Notes and citations === == External links == * * Category:Tertiary colors Category:Quaternary colors Category:LGBT symbols .