A sash is a large and usually colorful ribbon or band of material worn around the body, either draping from one shoulder to the opposing hip and back up, or else running around the waist. The sash around the waist may be worn in daily attire, but the sash from shoulder to hip is worn on ceremonial occasions only. Ceremonial sashes are also found in a V-shaped format, draping straight from both shoulders down, intersecting and forming an angle over the chest or abdomen. == Military use == === Old Europe === thumb|left|160px|Elaborately embroidered sash from 1635 to 1642 In the mid- and late-16th century waist and shoulder sashes came up as mark of (high) military rank or to show personal affection to a political party or nation. During the Thirty Years' War the distinctive sash colour of the House of Habsburg was red while their French opponents wore white or blue sashes and the Swedish voted for blue sashes. Beginning from the end of the 17th century, commissioned officers in the British Army wore waist sashes of crimson silk. The original officer's sash was six inches wide by eighty-eight inches long with a ten-inch (gold or silver) fringe. It was large enough to form a hammock stretcher to carry a wounded officer. From about 1730 to 1768, the officer's sash was worn baudericke wise, i.e. from the right shoulder to the left hip, and afterwards around the waist again.Carl Franklin: British Army Uniforms of the American Revolution 1751-1783, Barnsley: Pen & Sword Military, 2012, , p. 356, p. 371, Sergeants were permitted sashes of crimson wool, with a single stripe of facing colour following the clothing regulations of 1727. Whereas it remained vague whether the sash was to be worn over the shoulder or around the waist, it was clarified in 1747 that sergeants had to wear their sashes around the waist. From 1768, the sergeant's waist sash had one (until 1825) resp. three (until 1845) stripes of facing colour; in regiments with red or purple facings the sergeant's sash had white stripes or remained plain crimson.(Major) R. (Robert) Money Barnes, Military uniforms of Britain & the Empire: 1742 to the present time, London: Seeley Service & Co, 1960, p. 52. Until 1914 waist- sashes in distinctive national colours were worn as a peace-time mark of rank by officers of the Imperial German, Austro-Hungarian and Russian armies, amongst others. === Modern Europe === Since then sashes have been part of formal military attire (compare the sword-belt known as a baldric, and the cummerbund). Thus several other modern armies retain waist-sashes for wear by officers in ceremonial uniforms. These include the armies of Norway (crimson sashes), Sweden (yellow and blue), Greece (light blue and white), the Netherlands (orange), Portugal (crimson) and Spain (red and gold for generals, light blue for general staff and crimson for infantry officers).Rinaldo D'Ami, "World Uniforms in Colour - the European Nations", The Spanish Regulares (infantry descended from colonial regiments formerly recruited in Spanish Morocco) retain their historic waist-sashes for all ranks in colours that vary according to the unit.José Bueno, Ejército Español, Uniformes Contemporáneos", Sashes are a distinctive feature of some regiments of the modern French Army for parade dress. They are worn around the waist in the old Algerian or zouave style ("ceinture de laine"). Traditionally these sashes were more than in length and in width. In the historic French Army of Africa, sashes were worn around the waist in either blue for European or red for indigenous troops.André Jouineau, "The French Army in 1914", pages 45-63, === (British) Commonwealth of Nations === The modern British Army retains a scarlet sash for wear in certain orders of dress by sergeants and above serving in infantry regiments, over the right shoulder to the left hip. A similar crimson silk net sash is worn around the waist by officers of the Foot Guards in scarlet full dress and officers of line infantry in dark blue "Number 1" dress. The same practice is followed in some Commonwealth armies. The present-day armies of India and Pakistan both make extensive use of waist-sashes for ceremonial wear. The colours vary widely according to regiment or branch and match those of the turbans where worn. Typically two or more colours are incorporated in the sash, in vertical stripes. One end hangs loose at the side and may have an ornamental fringe. The practice of wearing distinctive regimental sashes or cummerbunds goes back to the late nineteenth century.John Gaylor, "Sons of John Company - the Indian and Pakistan Armies", Cross-belts resembling sashes are worn by Drum Majors in the Dutch, British and some Commonwealth armies. These carry scrolls bearing the names of battle honours. === United States of America === In the United States, George Washington, who served as commander- in-chief of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War and later served as the first President of the United States, was noted for wearing a blue ribbed sash, similar to that of the British Order of the Garter, early in the war, as he had in 1775 prescribed the use of green, pink, and blue sashes to identify aides de camp, brigade-majors, brigadiers general, majors general, and the commander in chief in the absence of formal uniforms. He later gave up the sash as "unrepublican" and "pretentious for all but the highest-ranking aristocracy," according to historians. Washington is seen wearing the sash in Charles Wilson Peale's 1779 painting Washington at Princeton. Sashes continued to be used in the United States Army for sergeants and officers. In 1821 the red sashes (crimson for officers) were limited to first sergeants and above. In 1872 the sashes were abolished by all ranks but generals who continued to wear their buff silk sashes in full dress until 1917. Waist sashes (in combination with a sabre) in the old style are still worn by the officers and senior NCOs of the Commander-in-Chief's Guard of the 3rd U.S. Infantry Regiment (The Old Guard) as well by the West Point Band drum major along with the West Point cadet officers.Fredrick Todd, "Cadet Gray: A pictorial history of life at West Point as seen through its uniforms", Sterling Publishing 1955, p. 40West Point Band The drum major of the Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps also still wears a waist sash, but no sidearms. At the time of the American Civil War (1861–65) generals of the regular US Army wore silk sashes in buff. Officers were authorized silk sashes in crimson (medical officers: emerald) while red woolen sashes were entitled to senior non- commissioned officers (Army Regulations of 1861). In the Confederate Army sashes were worn by all sergeant ranks and officers. The colour indicated the corps or status of the wearer. For example: yellow for cavalry, burgundy for infantry, black for chaplains, red for sergeants, green or blue for medics, and grey or cream for general officers. === Japan === Japanese officers continued the practice in full dress uniform until 1940.Ritta Nakanishi, "Japanese Military Uniforms 1930-1945, 1991 Dai Nippon Kaiga ==Modern civilian and cultural use== With the genesis of complex systems of military and civilian awards during the 18th century in most European countries, sashes became a distinguishing part of decorations and are mostly worn along with medals or orders. Today most of the European royal families wear sashes as a part of their royal (and/or military) regalia. Some orders such as the Légion d'honneur include sashes as part of the seniormost grades' insignia. Likewise, Italian military officers wear light blue sashes over the right shoulder on ceremonial occasions. In Latin America and some countries of Africa, a special presidential sash indicates a president's authority. In France and Italy, sashes, featuring the national flag tricolours and worn on the right shoulder, are used by public authorities and local officials, such as legislators, in public ceremonial events. In the United States, the sash has picked up a more ceremonial and less practical purpose. Sashes are used at higher education commencement ceremonies, by high school homecoming parade nominees, in beauty pageants, as well as by corporations to acknowledge high achievement. In Canada, hand-woven sashes (called ceintures fléchées and sometimes "L'Assomption sash" after a Québec town in which they were mass-produced) were derived from Iroquois carrying belts sometime in the 18th century. As a powerful multi-use tool this sash found use in the fur trade which brought it into the North West by French voyageurs. In this period the weave got tighter and size expanded, with some examples more than four metres in length. Coloured thread was widely used. The sash is a shared cultural emblem between French-Canadians and Métis peoples. Today it is considered to be primarily a symbol of the 1837 Lower Canada Rebellion Patriotes and the Métis Nation. In modern times, Bonhomme Carnaval, snowman mascot of the Quebec Winter Carnival wears a ceintures fléchées as part of his attire in recognition of the province's heritage. In the British Isles, especially Northern Ireland, the sash is a symbol of the Orange Order. Orange Order sashes were originally of the ceremonial shoulder-to-hip variety as worn by the British military. Over the 20th century, the sash has been mostly replaced by V-shaped collarettes, which are still generally referred to as sashes. The item is celebrated in the song 'The Sash my Father Wore'. Sashes are also worn by Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and Beauty Pageant Participants. Badges are sewn onto the sash, to indicate achievements of the Scout. Sashes are part of the diplomatic uniform of many countries. Many modern schools of Chinese martial arts use sashes of various colors to denote rank as a reflection of the Japanese ranking system using belts. The Japanese equivalent of a sash, obi, serves to hold a kimono or yukata together. == Honorific orders == Sashes are indicative of holding the class of Grand Cross or Grand Cordon in a chivalric order or an order of merit. The sash is usually worn from the right shoulder to the left hip. A few orders do the contrary, according to their traditional statute. thumbnail|160px|Knight of the Garter in the 1720s with Garter sash === Orders with the sash worn on the left shoulder === Europe: * : Order of the Elephant * : Order of the Falcon * : Order of the White Eagle * : Order of the Garter * (Scotland): Order of the Thistle Asia: * : Grand Order of Mugunghwa * : Order of the Royal House of ChakriRoyal Cabinet Website * : Order of Chula Chom KlaoRoyal Cabinet Website * : Knight Grand Cordon (Special Class) on left shoulder but Knight Grand Cross (First Class): right shoulder, for: ** Order of the White ElephantRoyal Cabinet Website, Order of the White Elephant ** Order of the Crown of ThailandRoyal Cabinet Website, Order of the Crown of Thailand Federation of Malaysia Decorations Decorations Post-nominal Grade Grade Ribbon Sources The Most Exalted and Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Malaysia Darjah Kerabat Diraja Malaysia The Most Exalted and Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Malaysia Darjah Kerabat Diraja Malaysia DKM Recipient Recipient 100px General visual table of decorations The Most Exalted Order of the Crown of the Realm Darjah Utama Seri Mahkota Negara The Most Exalted Order of the Crown of the Realm Darjah Utama Seri Mahkota Negara DMN Recipient Recipient 100px Sultanate of Kedah The Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Kedah Darjah Kerabat Yang Amat Mulia Kedah The Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Kedah Darjah Kerabat Yang Amat Mulia Kedah DK Member Member 100px Sultanate of Kelantan The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Kelantan (Al-Yunusi Star) Darjah Kerabat Yang Amat di-Hormati (Bintang al-Yunusi) The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Kelantan (Al-Yunusi Star) Darjah Kerabat Yang Amat di-Hormati (Bintang al-Yunusi) DK Recipient Recipient 100px Sultanate of Negeri Sembilan The Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Negeri Sembilan Darjah Kerabat Neegri Sembilan Yang Amat di-Mulia The Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Negeri Sembilan Darjah Kerabat Neegri Sembilan Yang Amat di-Mulia DKNS Member Member 100px The Order of Negeri Sembilan - Darjah Negeri Sembilan Darjah Tertinggi Negeri Sembilan Darjah Tertinggi Negeri Sembilan DTNS Paramount Paramount 100px Darjah Mulia Negeri Sembilan Darjah Mulia Negeri Sembilan DMNS Illustrious Illustrious 100px Sultanate of Pahang The Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Pahang Darjah Kerabat Yang Maha Mulia Utama Kerabat di-Raja Pahang The Most Illustrious Royal Family Order of Pahang Darjah Kerabat Yang Maha Mulia Utama Kerabat di-Raja Pahang DKP Member (Ahli) Member (Ahli) 100px The Most Esteemed Family Order of the Crown of Indra of Pahang Darjah Kerabat Sri Indra Mahkota Pahang Yang Amat di-Hormati The Most Esteemed Family Order of the Crown of Indra of Pahang Darjah Kerabat Sri Indra Mahkota Pahang Yang Amat di-Hormati DK I Member 1st class Member 1st class 100px Sultanate of Perak The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Perak Darjah Kerabat di-Raja Yang Amat di-Hormati The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Perak Darjah Kerabat di-Raja Yang Amat di-Hormati DK Member (Ahli) Member (Ahli) 100px (before 2001) 100px (after 2001) The Most Esteemed Perak Family Order of Sultan Azlan Shah Darjah Kerabat Sultan Azlan Shah Perak Yang Amat di-Hormati The Most Esteemed Perak Family Order of Sultan Azlan Shah Darjah Kerabat Sultan Azlan Shah Perak Yang Amat di-Hormati DKSA Superior class Superior class 100px The Most Esteemed Azlanii Royal Family Order Darjah Yang Teramat Mulia Darjah Kerabat Azlanii The Most Esteemed Azlanii Royal Family Order Darjah Yang Teramat Mulia Darjah Kerabat Azlanii DKA I Member First Class Member First Class 100px Sultanate of Perlis The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Perlis Darjah Kerabat di-Raja Perlis Yang Amat Amat di-Hormati The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Perlis Darjah Kerabat di-Raja Perlis Yang Amat Amat di-Hormati DKP Recipient Recipient 100px The M. Est. Perlis Family Order of the Gallant Prince Syed Putra Jamalullail Darjah Kerabat Perlis Baginda Tuanku Syed Putra Jamalullail Yang Amat Amat di- Hormati The M. Est. Perlis Family Order of the Gallant Prince Syed Putra Jamalullail Darjah Kerabat Perlis Baginda Tuanku Syed Putra Jamalullail Yang Amat Amat di- Hormati DK Recipient Recipient 100px Sultanate of Selangor The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Selangor - Darjah Kerabat Selangor Yang Amat di-Hormati Darjah Kerabat Selangor Pertama Darjah Kerabat Selangor Pertama DK I First Class First Class 100px Darjah Kerabat Selangor Kedua Darjah Kerabat Selangor Kedua DK II Second Class Second Class 100px Selangor Official Website, DK II Sultanate of Terengganu The Most Exalted Supreme Royal Family Order of Terengganu (10/03/1981) Darjah Utama Kerabat di-Raja Terengganu Yang Amat di-Hormati The Most Exalted Supreme Royal Family Order of Terengganu (10/03/1981) Darjah Utama Kerabat di-Raja Terengganu Yang Amat di-Hormati DKT Member (Ahli) Member (Ahli) 100px The Most Distinguished Family Order of Terengganu (19/06/1962) Darjah Kebesaran Kerabat Terengganu Yang Amat Mulia The Most Distinguished Family Order of Terengganu (19/06/1962) Darjah Kebesaran Kerabat Terengganu Yang Amat Mulia DK I Member 1st class Ahli Yang Pertama Member 1st class Ahli Yang Pertama 100px === Classified examples of current orders' sashes === Colours classified in the order of the rainbow : White Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Indigo Violet Black Colours classified in the order of the rainbow : . . . . . \--> WHITE WHITE WHITE WHITE WHITE 80px () Order of the Dannebrog 80px () Order of Grimaldi 80px () Order of Vytautas the Great 70px / 70px () Order of Isabella the Catholic 80px () Order of Liberty RED RED RED RED RED 80px () Order of the Golden Fleece 80px () Order of Christ 80px () Order of the Legion of Honour 80px () Order of the Lion of Finland 80px () Order of Merit of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg 80px () Decoration of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria 80px () Order of Saint-Charles 80px () Order of May 80px () Order of the White Lion 80px () Order of the Crown of Tonga 80px () Royal Order of Pouono 80px () Order of St. Olav 80px () Royal Order of King Sobhuza II 80px () Military Order of Swaziland 80px () Royal Order of Cambodia 80px () Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany 70px / 70px () Order of Logohu 80px () Order of the White Elephant 80px () Order of the Golden Heart 80px () Order of the Burning Spear 80px () Order of the Chrysanthemum 70px|Ancient / 70px|Current () Order of Merit of the Principality of Liechtenstein 80px () Order of the Star of Romania 80px () Order of Saint Gregory the Great 80px () Order of the Golden Spur OTHER SHADES OF RED : CRIMSON / PINK OTHER SHADES OF RED : CRIMSON / PINK OTHER SHADES OF RED : CRIMSON / PINK OTHER SHADES OF RED : CRIMSON / PINK OTHER SHADES OF RED : CRIMSON / PINK 80px () Order of the Bath 80px () Order of the Crown 80px () Order of the White Star 80px () Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation 80px () Order of Chula Chom Klao ORANGE ORANGE ORANGE ORANGE ORANGE 80px () Order of the Phoenix 80px () Order of the House of Orange 80px () Order for Loyalty and Merit 80px () Order of the Dragon King 80px () National Order of Merit 80px () Order of the Precious Crown 80px () Order of the Lithuanian Grand Duke Gediminas 80px () Order of Orange-Nassau 80px () Order of the Crown 80px () Order of the Phoenix YELLOW / GOLD / YELLOW-ORANGE YELLOW / GOLD / YELLOW- ORANGE YELLOW / GOLD / YELLOW-ORANGE YELLOW / GOLD / YELLOW-ORANGE YELLOW / GOLD / YELLOW-ORANGE 80px () Order of the Aztec Eagle 80px () Order of the Royal House of Chakri 80px () Royal Order of the Great She-Elephant 80px () Medal of Victory of the Thunder Dragon 80px () Order of Moniseraphon 80px () Royal Household Order of Tonga 80px () Order of the Rajamitrabhorn 80px () National Order of Mali 80px () Order of Merit 80px () Royal Household Order of Swaziland 80px (-) Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau 80px () Order of Beneficence 80px () Royal Family Order of Queen Elizabeth II 80px () Order of the Golden Heart 80px () Order of Public Instruction GREEN GREEN GREEN GREEN GREEN 80px () Order of the Thistle 80px () Order of Aviz 80px () Order of the Condor of the Andes 80px () Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus 80px () Order of the Lion 80px () Order of the Crown 80px () Order of Merit of the Italian Republic 80px () Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary 80px () Order of the Direkgunabhorn 80px () Order of the Star of Jordan BLUE BLUE BLUE BLUE BLUE 80px () Royal Norwegian Order of Merit 80px () Order of the White Rose of Finland 80px () Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana 80px () Order of the Tower and Sword 80px () Order of Merit of the Republic of Poland 80px () Ordre national du Mérite 80px () Order of the Merit of Chile 80px () Order of the Garter 80px () Order of the Holy Spirit 80px () Order of the White Eagle 80px () Royal Order of the Seraphim 80px () Order of Queen Salote Tupou III 80px () Order of the Elephant 80px () Order of the Southern Cross 80px () Most Dignified Order of Moshoeshoe 80px () Order of Rio Branco 80px () Order of the Redeemer 80px () Order of the Liberator General San Martín 70px / 70px () Order of Civil Merit 70px / 70px () Order of Charles III 80px () Order of Faithful Service 80px (-) Order of the African Star 80px () Order of the Falcon 80px () Royal Victorian Order 80px / 80px () Order of the Crown of Thailand 70px / 70px () Order of the Defender of the Realm 70px / 70px () Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia 80px () Order of St Michael and St George 80px () Order of the White Double Cross 80px () Order of Pius IX 80px () Order of Adolphe of Nassau 80px () Order of Honour 80px () Order of the Netherlands Lion 80px () Order of the Three Stars 80px () Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise 80px () Order of the Polar Star 80px () Order of Leopold II 80px () Order of the Crown of the Realm 80px () Order of the Nile VIOLET - PURPLE VIOLET - PURPLE VIOLET - PURPLE VIOLET - PURPLE VIOLET - PURPLE 80px () Order of Saint James of the Sword 80px () Order of Leopold 80px () Order of the Sun 80px () Order of al-Hussein bin Ali 80px () Order of Queen Maria Luisa 80px () Order of Independence 80px () Order of Vasco Núñez de Balboa 80px (-) Royal Order of the Lion 80px () Order of Culture 80px () Legion of Merit BLACK BLACK BLACK BLACK BLACK 80px () Order of the Holy Sepulchre 80px () Sovereign Military Order of Malta 80px () Order of Rama 80px () Order of Merit 80px () Order of Saint Sylvester TRICOLOR / MORE COMPLEX TRICOLOR / MORE COMPLEX TRICOLOR / MORE COMPLEX TRICOLOR / MORE COMPLEX TRICOLOR / MORE COMPLEX 80px () Order of the Star of Melanesia 80px () Order of Prince Henry 80px () Star of the Solomon Islands 80px () National Order of Merit 80px () Royal Order of Bhutan 80px () Supreme Order of the Renaissance 80px () Grand Order of King Tomislav 80px () Grand Order of Queen Jelena 80px () Order of Liberty 80px () Most Courteous Order of Lesotho ==See also== *Presidential sash *West Point Cadets' Sword *Order (honour) *Phaleristics *Religious sash ==References== ==Bibliography== * * ==External links== * Category:Belts (clothing) Category:Fashion accessories Category:Shawls and wraps .